that what I regard as the objective, more or less deliberate manifestations of my existence are merely the
premises, within the limits of this existence, of an
activity whose true extent is quite unknown to me.
My image of the "ghost," including everything conventional about its appearance as well as its blind
submission to certain contingencies of time and place,
is particularly significant for me as the finite representation of a torment that may be eternal. Perhaps
my life is nothing but an image of this kind; perhaps
I am doomed to retrace my steps under the illusion
that I am exploring, doomed to try and learn what I
should simply recognize, learning a mere fraction of
what I have forgotten. This sense of myself seems
inadequate only insofar as it presupposes myself, arbitrarily preferring a completed image of my mind
which need not be reconciled with time, and insofar
as it implies-within this same time-an idea of irreparable loss, of punishment, of a fall whose lack of
moral basis is, as I see it, indisputable. What matters
is that the particular aptitudes my day-to-day life
gradually reveals should not distract me from my
search for a general aptitude which would be реculiar to me and which is not innate. Over and above
the various prejudices I acknowledge, the affinities
I feel, the attractions I succumb to, the events which
occur to me and to me alone-over and above a sum
of of movements I am conscious of making, emo-
Nadja /13
tions I alone experience-I strive, in relation to other
men, to discover the nature, if not the necessity, of
my difference from them. Is it not precisely to the
degree I become conscious of this difference that I
shall recognize what I alone have been put on this
earth to do, what unique message I alone may bear,
so that I alone can answer for its fate?
Such reflections lead me to the conclusion that
criticism, abjuring, it is true, its dearest prerogatives
but aiming, on the whole, at a goal less futile than
the automatic adjustment of ideas, should confine
itself to scholarly incursions upon the very realm
supposedly barred to it, and which, separate from
the work, is a realm where the author's personality,
victimized by the petty events of daily life, expresses itself quite freely and often in so distinctive
a manner. Consider this anecdote: Hugo, toward
the end of his life, took the same ride with Juliette
Drouet every day, always interrupting his wordless
meditation when their carriage passed an estate with
two gates, one large, one small; pointing to the large
gate, Hugo, for perhaps the thousandth time, would
say: "Bridle gate, Madame," to which Juliette, pointing to the small gate, would reply: "Pedestrian gate,
Monsieur"; then, a little farther on, passing two trees
with intertwining branches, Hugo would remark:
"Philemon and Baucis," knowing that Juliette would
14/ André Breton
not answer; we have reason to believe that this marvelous, poignant ritual was repeated daily for years
on end; yet how could the best possible study of
Hugo's work give us a comparable awareness, the
astonishing sense of what he was, of what he is?
Those two gates are like the mirror of his strength
and his weakness, we do not know which stands for
his insignificance, which for his greatness. And what
good would all the genius in the world be to us if
it failed to countenance that adorable correction, the
redress of love itself, which so perfectly characterizes
Juliette's reply? The subtlest, the most enthusiastic
of Hugo's critics will never make me feel anything
to equal this supreme sense of proportion. I should
be privileged indeed to possess, in the case of each
of the men I admire, a personal document of corresponding value. Lacking these, I should even be
content with records of a lesser value, less self-contained from an emotional point of view. I do not
admire Flaubert, yet when I am told that by his own
admission all he hoped to accomplish in Salammbộ
was to "give the impression of the color yellow,"
and in Madame Bovary "to do something that would
have the color of those mouldy cornices that harbor
wood lice," and that he cared for nothing else, such
generally extra-literary preoccupations leave me anything but indifferent. The magnificent light in Courbet's paintings is for me the same as that of the Place
Nadja /15
Vendôme, at the time the Column fell. If today a
man like Chirico would confide-entirely and, of
course, artlessly, including the least consequential as
well as the most disturbing details-what it was that
once made him paint as he did, such a step, taken by
such a man, would mean an enormous advance for
exegesis. Without him, indeed despite him, merely
by means of his early paintings and a manuscript
notebook before me as I write, we can only imperfectly reconstruct his universe up till 1917. How
deeply I regret my inability to fill this gap, to grasp
all that contradicts the natural order in such a universe, creating a new scale of things. Chirico аcknowledged at the time that he could paint only
when surprised (surprised first of all) by certain
arrangements of objects, and that the entire enigma
of revelation consisted for him in this word: surprise. Certainly the resulting work remained "closely
linked with what had provoked its birth," but resembled it only "in the strange way two brothers resemble each other, or rather as a dream about someone
resembles that person in reality. It is, and at the same
time is not, the same person; a slight and mysterious
transfiguration is apparent in the features." Without
considering the actual arrangements of objects which
for Chirico exhibit a flagrant peculiarity, critical attention may still turn to these objects themselves and
determine why it is always these same ones, in such
16/ André Breton
small numbers, that are called upon to arrange themselves in this way. We have said nothing about
Chirico until we take into account his most personal
views about the artichoke, the glove, the cookie, or
the spool. In such matters as these, how much we
could gain from his co-operation! As far as I am
concerned, a mind's arrangement with regard to certain objects is even more important than its regard
for certain arrangements of objects, these two kinds
of arrangement controlling between them all forms
of sensibility. Thus with Huysmans, the Huysmans
of En Rade and Là-Bas, I find so much in common
about our ways of valuing the world, of choosing
with all the partiality of despair among what exists,
that though unfortunately I have been unable to
know him save by his work, he is, perhaps, less of
a stranger to me than any of my friends. But has
he not also done more than anyone else to consummate that necessary, vital discrimination between the
apparently fragile link which can be of the utmost
aid to us and the dizzying array of forces which
conspire together for our destruction? He has familiarized me with that tremulous ennui which almost any spectacle induced in him; no one before
Huysmans could, if not exemplify this great victory
of the involuntary over the ravaged domain of conscious possibilities, at least convince me in human
terms of its absolute inevitability and of the use-
Nadja /17
lessness of trying to find loopholes for myself. How
grateful I am to him for letting me know, without
caring about the effect such revelations produced,
everything that affects him, that occupies him in
his hours of gravest anxiety, everything external to
his anxiety, for not pathetically "singing" his distress
like too many poets, but for enumerating patiently,
in the darkness, some quite involuntary reasons he
still found for being, and for being-to whose advantage he never really knew-a writer! He, too, is
the object of one of those perpetual solicitations
which seem to come from beyond, which momentarily possess us before one of those chance arrangements, of a more or less unfamiliar character, whose
secret we feel might be learned merely by questioning ourselves closely enough. Need I add how
differently I regard Huysmans from all those empiricists of the novel who claim to give us characters
separate from themselves, to define them physically,
morally-in their fashion!-in the service of some
cause we should prefer to disregard! Out of one real
character about whom they suppose they know something they make two characters in their story; out
of two, they make one. And we even bother to
argue! Someone suggested to an author I know, in
connection with a work of his about to be published
and whose heroine might be too readily recognized,
that he change at least the color of her hair. As a
18 André Breton
blonde, apparently, she might have avoided betraying
a brunette. I do not regard such a thing as childish,
I regard it as monstrous. I insist on knoving the
names, on being interested only in books left ajar,
like doors; I will not go looking for keys. Happily
the days of psychological literature, with all its fictitious plots, are numbered. And there is no doubt
that the mortal blow was delivered by Huysmans.
I myself shall continue living in my glass house where
you can always see who comes to call; where everything hanging from the ceiling and on the walls stays
where it is as if by magic, where I sleep nights in
a glass bed, under glass sheets, where who I am will
sooner or later appear etched by a diamond. Certainly nothing in this regard distresses me so much
as Lautréamont's complete disappearance behind his
work, and his terrible "tics, tics, and tics" is constantly in my thoughts. But I find something supernatural in the circumstances of a human obliteration
so complete. It would be only too futile to aspire to
it, and I readily persuade myself that such a wish
on the part of those who take shelter behind it indicates the kind of ambition that is scarcely honorable.
Monsieur Tristan Tzara would doubtless prefer it
not to be known that during the performance of the
Coeur à Barbe in Paris he handed us-Paul Eluard
and myself-over to the police, though a spontaneous
action of this sort is so profoundly revealing that in
Nadja /19
its light, which cannot help being that of history as
well, Tzara's 25 Poems (the title of one of his books)
becomes 25 Policeman's Lucubrations.
I intend to mention, in the margin of the narrative
I have yet to relate, only the most decisive episodes
of my life as I can conceive it apart from its organic
plan, and only insofar as it is at the mercy of chance
-the merest as well as the greatest-temporarily
escaping my control, admitting me to an almost forbidden world of sudden parallels, petrifying coincidences, and reflexes peculiar to each individual, of
harmonies struck as though on the piano, flashes of
light that would make you see, really see, if only
they were not so much quicker than all the rest. I
am concerned with facts of quite unverifiable intrinsic value, but which, by their absolutely unexpected, violently fortuitous character, and the kind
of associations of suspect ideas they provoke-a way
of transforming gossamer into spiderweb (that is,
into what would be the most shimmering, delicate
thing in the world were it not for the spider in the
corner); I am concerned, I say, with facts which
may belong to the order of pure observation, but
which on each occasion present all the appearances
of a signal, without our being able to say precisely
which signal, and of what; facts which when I am
alone permit me to enjoy unlikely complicities,
which convince me of my error in occasionally pre-
20 André Breton
suming I stand at the helm alone. Such facts, from
the simplest to the most complex, should be assigned
a hierarchy, from the special, indefinable reaction at
the sight of extremely rare objects or upon our arrival in a strange place (both accompanied by the
distinct sensation that something momentous, something essential depends upon them), to the complete
lack of peace with ourselves provoked by certain
juxtapositions, certain combinations of circumstances
which greatly surpass our understanding and permit
us to resume rational activity only if, in most cases,
we call upon our very instinct of self-preservation
to enable us to do so. We might establish a number
of intermediate steps between such slope-facts and
such cliff-facts. Between those of which I can be
only the agonized witness and those others about
which I flatter myself I possess the full details, there
is perhaps the same distance as between one of those
declarations or series of declarations which constitutes the sentence or the text known as "surrealist"
and the declaration or series of declarations which,
for the same observer, constitutes the sentence or
the text whose every term he has fully weighed and
measured. He does not consider his responsibility involved, so to speak, in the first case; it is involved
in the second. On the other hand, he is infinitely
more surprised, more fascinated by what happens in
the former than in the latter. He is also prouder of
HOTEL DEF GRANDS HOMMES
MAISON HENR BORN
PLATE 1. My point of departure will
the Hôtel des Grands Hommes...
(SEE PAGE 23)
be
PLATE 2. The Manoir d'Ango
in Varengeville-sur-Mer
(SEE PAGE 23)
Nadja / 23
it, which is certainly remarkable, and feels the freer
for it. This is the case with those privileged sensations
I have mentioned and whose share of incommunicability is itself a source of pleasures that have no
equal.
Do not expect me to provide an exact account of
what I have been permitted to experience in this
domain. I shall limit myself here to recalling without
effort certain things which, apart from any exertions
on my part, have occasionally happened to me, things
which, reaching me in unsuspected ways, give me
the measure of the particular grace and disgrace of
which I am the object; I shall discuss these things
without pre-established order, and according to the
mood of the moment which lets whatever survives
survive. My point of departure will be the Hôtel des
Grands Hommes, Place du Panthéon, where I lived
around 1918, and my first halt the Manoir d'Ango
in Varengeville-sur-Mer, where I stayed in August,
1927, still very much the same person-the Manoir
d'Ango where I was offered the hospitality, when
I wished to be undisturbed, of a hut artificially camouflaged by shrubbery, at the edge of a woods; here,
while in other respects occupying myself with whatever I liked, I was able to hunt owls as well. (Could
it have been otherwise, once I decided to write
Nadja?) Actually, it is of little importance if an occasional error or omission, a genuine anomaly or
24/ André Breton
lacuna casts a shadow across my narrative, across
what, taken as a whole, cannot be substantiated. I
must insist, lastly, that such accidents of thought not
be reduced to their unjust proportion as faits-divers,
random episodes, so that when I say, for instance,
that the statue of Etienne Dolet on its plinth in the
Place Maubert in Paris has always fascinated me and
induced unbearable discomfort, it will not immediately be supposed that I am merely ready for psychoanalysis, a method I respect and whose present
aims I consider nothing less than the expulsion of
man from himself, and of which I expect other exploits than those of a bouncer. I am convinced,
moreover, that as a discipline psychoanalysis is not
qualified to deal with such phenomena, since despite
its great merits we already do this method too much
honor by conceding that it exhausts the problem of
dreams or that it does not simply occasion further
inhibitions by its very interpretation of inhibitions.
Which leads me to my own experience, to what is
for me, concerning myself, a virtually continuous
subject of meditation and reverie:
The day of the first performance of Apollinaire's
Couleur du Temps at the Conservatoire Renée Maubel, while I was talking to Picasso in the balcony
during the intermission, a young man approaches me,
stammers a few words, and finally manages to ex-
TAL
PLATE 3. When I say that the statue of Etienne Dolet on its plinth
in the Place Maubert in Paris has always fascinated me
and induced unbearable discomfort..
(SEE PAGE 24)
PLATE 4. Paul Eluard
PHOTO: MAN RAY
(SEE PAGE 27)
Nadja /27
plain that he had mistaken me for one of his friends
supposedly killed in the war. Naturally, nothing
more was said. A few days later, through a mutual
friend, I begin corresponding with Paul Eluard,
whom I did not know by sight. On furlough, he
comes to see me: I am in the presence of the same
person as at Couleur du Temps.
The words BOIS-CHARBONS, which appear on
the last page of Les Champs Magnétiques, enabled
me, during the whole of one Sunday I spent walking
with Philippe Soupault, to exhibit a peculiar talent
for detecting every shop they serve to designate. It
seems to me I was able to say, no matter what street
we were in, how far along on the right or left these
shops would appear. And my predictions always
turned out to be right. I was informed, guided, not
by the hallucinatory image of the words in question,
but rather by one of those logs in cross-section,
crudely painted on the façade, in little piles on
each side of the door, all the same color with a darker
center. Once I reached home, this image continued
to obsess me. A tune from the carousel in the Carrefour Médicis seemed to be this log too. And, from
my window, the skull of Jean-Jacques Rousseau as
well, whose statue I could see from behind and two
or three stories below me. That day day II was very
28 André Breton
frightened.
Still in my hotel, Place du Panthéon, one evening,
late. Someone knocks. In comes a woman whose approximate age and features I cannot now recall. In
mourning, I think. She asks me for a number of the
review Littérature which has not yet appeared and
which someone has made her promise to take to
Nantes the next day. She insists, reluctant though I
am, upon having it. But her chief reason for coming,
it seems, is to "recommend" the person who has sent
her and who will soon be living in Paris. (I still remember the expression "would like to launch himself
in literature" which subsequently, knowing to whom
it referred, seemed so curious, so moving.) But who
was I being urged in this more than chimerical way
to welcome, to advise? A few days later, Benjamin
Péret was there.
Nantes: perhaps, with Paris, the only city in
France where I feel that something worth while can
happen to me, where certain eyes burn all too
brightly for their own sake (I noticed this only last
year, the time it took to cross Nantes by car and see
that woman-a workingwoman, I think, accompanied by a man-raise her eyes: I should have
stopped), where for me the rhythm of life is not
COURTINE BOIS CHABBONS
19000
0000
০৫০০
0000
9000
CesBo
PLATE 5. The words BOIS-CHARBONS
(SEE PAGE 27)
PHOTO: MAN RAY
PLATE 6. A few days later, Benjamin Péret was there
(SEE PAGE 28)
Nadja /31
the same as elsewhere, where certain beings still nourish a spirit of supreme adventure, Nantes, a city
friends can still come to me from, Nantes, where
I loved one park: Le parc de Procé.
Once again, now, I see Robert Desnos at the perioр
those of us who knew him call the “Nap Period."
He "dozes" but he writes, he talks. It is evening, in
my studio over the Cabaret du Ciel. Outside, someone is shouting: "Come one, come all, come to the
Chat Noir!" And Desnos continues seeing what I do
not see, what I see only after he shows it to me. He
borrows the personality of the most singular man
alive as well as the most elusive, the most deceptive,
the author of Le Cimetière des Uniformes et Livrées,
Marcel Duchamp. Desnos has never seen him in real
life. What in Duchamp seemed most inimitable
through some mysterious "plays on words" (Rrose
Sélavy) can be found in Desnos in all its purity and
suddenly assumes an extraordinary resonance. Those
who have not seen his pencil set on paper-without
the slightest hesitation and with an astonishing speed
-those amazing poetic equations, and have not ascertained, as I have, that they could not have been prepared a long time before, even if they are capable
of appreciating their technical perfection and of judging their wonderful loftiness, cannot conceive of
everything involved in their creation at the time, of
32/ André Breton
the absolutely oracular value they assumed. Someone
who was present at those innumerable sessions would
have to take the trouble to recount them dispassionately, to describe them precisely, to situate them in
their true atmosphere. A discussion of this point is
actually called for. Of all the subsequent appointments Desnos, his eyes closed, made for me with himself, with someone else, or with myself, there is not
one I feel, even now, I have the heart to miss, not one,
at the most unlikely place and time, where I am not
sure of finding whomever he has told me about.
Meanwhile, you can be sure of meeting me in
Paris, of not spending more than three days without
seeing me pass, toward the end of the afternoon, along
the Boulevard Bonne-Nouvelle between the Matin
printing office and the Boulevard de Strasbourg. I
don't know why it should be precisely here that my
feet take me, here that I almost invariably go without
specific purpose, without anything to induce me but
this obscure clue: namely that it (?) will happen here.
I cannot see, as I hurry along, what could constitute
for me, even without my knowing it, a magnetic pole
in either space or time. No: not even the extremely
handsome, extremely useless Porte Saint-Denis. Not
even the memory of the eighth and last episode of a
film I saw in the neighborhood, in which a Chinese
who had found some way to multiply himself in-
PHOTO: MAN RAY
PLATE 7. Once again, now, I see Robert Desnos...
(SEE PAGE 3I(
PLATE 8. No: not even the extremely handsome,
extremely useless Porte Saint-Denis.
(SEE PAGE 32)
C G FRANÇAISE DE CINEMATOGRAPHIE
AGENCE GÉNÉRALE CINÉMATOGRAPHIQUE
-16 Rue Grange Batelière PARIS
L'Étreinte de la Pieuvre
Grand Serial mysterieux en 5 eprodes
Interprete par Bis Wuses et Nevs Ga
Cinquième épisode: L'CEil de Satan
Queantalde que eMutotdCeercntes toor des
gon derahe da tra vee atine he pare mudile of ewet t santire yu
ntermee proate doe le Meve Hovrec Cat
rein de toite ane action de secnde phs ad,o ll p
t dane lePt
Man s Ze Satoom. Leeal avastor e
Cntertte da to fone Qot Rah wile ot ligotes ballmre
nemee Sn Fo cher Hep Lee, ere du Dr Wang P
Corterest un currepida gen ive a rementer a la sifare des was Еretu
IgetProudene tal que s hile Detenin Saady Ma Na suquet
it donne Ted de te onsutenicbile apparat t Fidemterdans la o
Caner Su hlentt allure vers S Fr
LaC debrqur thorel Wellington o les Zelate de Stsntotft
le depister. Li ne nonpe qua etrover Ruh Or, da Thotel, i recontse Jem Al K
yuutu due stiement pre M Zore, s femequeulait tu Ruh.
roe logttet dans te chrene de celle d Caer Peat-éten итрте
mant ane comersation de cete lemme wes ses mplices, Cartere eowis l
traite de Ruth Came e. spprced pd la jeune hile st schee das lequti
cs prend t mut de pove des euuturts qui etLE St
proare un hentie ccler de L'Home Masqu r prE
aet po ce deraict, eaug la leuns hlle, il connan plus prcisnt lo plar i
elle etsр
Ma se rend a burese du chet d t
policc un ange spoel mr esele o qu'i denat t s
Rurl Seantuр икlesmas de Hop Lere fue hable tstapem
ileratcition de songerdien elle souleve i ve epter de l'appuret et demande
mete boeas de la polior ett elle-mime qur, ws telephuse, revele
PLATE 9. This film, which has affected me
far more than any other..
(SEE PAGE 37)
REFERENCCE
L. MAZEAU
CONEDIES, RWLYEES, NPIRETTES
Tow CteClTp
Pu
OLTVPU
CHATELAт
SCALA
UEJA/ET
CLUNY
TH MONCEY
TH NOUVEAD
MOCERN
TH ALEXANURET
TH LYRIQUE DUI
VAMNTES FARINAN
Monsin
hewaz me &r
yutatnt a vothe lettre
en se detohre man tant astiallement
en tme Bast dle w m
e pndre gu a Crule l46
dante lnt. de rencgas
que je fomnen er fer us le
Weste Woderme tont
mor ne conconient for aue la vst
I e st tallilement ionn
laiser fare n 1916 r
PLATE 10. Speaking of the Théâtre Moderne
(SEE PAGE 38)
Nadja /37
vaded New York by means of several million selfreproductions. He entered President Wilson's office
followed by himself, and by himself, and by himself,
and by himself; the President removed his pince-nez.
This film, which has affected me far more than any
other, was called The Grip of the Octopus.
With this system which consists, before going into
a movie theater, of never looking to see what's playing-which, moreover, would scarcely do me any
good, since I cannot remember the names of more
than five or six actors-I obviously run the risk of
missing more than others, though here I must confess my weakness for the most absolutely absurd
French films. I understand, moreover, quite poorly,
I follow too vaguely. Sometimes this does bother me,
and then I question those sitting near me. Nevertheless, certain movie theaters in the tenth arrondissement seem to me to be places particularly intended for me, as during the period when, with
Jacques Vaché we would settle down to dinner in
the orchestra of the former Théâtre des Folies-Dramatiques, opening cans, slicing bread, uncorking bottles, and talking in ordinary tones, as if around a
table, to the great amazement of the spectators, who
dared not say a word.
Located at the end of the now destroyed Passage
381 André Breton
de l'Opéra, the "Théâtre Moderne," aside from the
fact that the plays put on there had still less importance, corresponded perfectly to my ideal in this
direction. The ridiculous acting of the performers,
who paid only the faintest attention to their parts,
scarcely listening to each other and busy making dates
with members of the audience, which consisted of
perhaps fifteen people at the most, always reminded
me of a canvas backdrop. But what could I find for
the fleeting and so easily alarmed image of myself,
that image I am talking about, which is worth the
welcome of this hall with its great, worn mirrors,
decorated toward the base with gray swans gliding
among yellow reeds, with its grillwork loges entirely
without air or light, as suspicious-looking as the hall
itself where during the performance rats crept about,
running over your feet, where, once inside, you had
your choice between a staved-in chair and one that
might tip over at any moment! And between the first
act and the second-for it was too preposterous to
wait for the third-what would I ever see again with
these eyes which have seen the "bar" upstairs, terribly dark too with its impenetrable bowers, "a living
room at the bottom of a lake," yes really? By coming
back here so often, I managed, at the price of so
many horrors, the worst imaginable, to memorize one
absolutely pure quatrain. It was a woman, oddly
enough a pretty one, who sang:
Nadja /39
La maison de mon coeur est prête
Et ne s'ouvre qu'à l'avenir.
Puisqu'il n'est rien que je regrette,
Mon bel époux, tu peux venir.*
I have always, beyond belief, hoped to meet, at
night and in a woods, a beautiful naked woman or
rather, since such a wish once expressed means nothing, I regret, beyond belief, not having met her.
Imagining such an encounter is not, after all, so fantastic: it might happen. It seems to me that everything
would have stopped short-I would not even be
writing what I am writing. I adore this situation
which of all situations is the one where I am most
likely to have lacked presence of mind. I would probably not even have thought of running away. (Anyone who laughs at this last sentence is a pig.) At the
end of one afternoon, last year, in the side aisles of
the "Electric-Palace," a naked woman, who must
have come in wearing only her coat, strolled, dead
white, from one row to the next. This in itself was
upsetting. Far, unfortunately, from being extraordinary enough, since this section of the "Electric" was
the most commonplace sort of illicit sexual rendezvous.
But for me to descend into what is truly the
*Var.: Amour nouveau, tu peux venir.
40/ André Breton
mind's lower depths, where it is no longer a question
of the night's falling and rising again (and is that the
day?), means to follow the Rue Fontaine back to
the Théâtre des Deux Masques, which has now been
replaced by a cabaret. I once went there, though
I have never been able to tolerate the theater, supposing that the play being put on couldn't be bad, so
harsh-to the point of demanding that the play be
banned-had the criticism of it been. Among the
"Grand Guignol" sort of plays customarily constituting the theater's repertory, it had seemed drastically out of place. It will be agreed that this in
itself was no ordinary recommendation. I will no
longer postpone expressing the unbounded admiration I felt for Les Détraquées, which remains and
will long remain the only dramatic work (I mean:
created exclusively for the stage) which I choose to
recall. The play, I insist-and this is not one of its
least curious aspects-loses almost everything, or at
least every character conflict, by not been seen, by
not being acted out. With these reservations, I do not
consider it unprofitable in other respects to relate
its plot.
The curtain rises on the office of the principal of
a girls' school. This woman, a rather stout blonde of
about forty, is discovered alone and gives signs of
great nervous tension. It is the day before vacation,
and she is anxiously expecting someone. "Solange
Nadja /41
should be here by now... ." She walks feverishly
around the room, touching the furniture, the papers
on her desk. From time to time she goes to the window overlooking the garden where we can tell that
the recess period has just begun: we have heard the
bell, then the occasional happy cries of girls immediately fading into the general racket. A moronic gardener, jerking his head, stammering unendurably,
and making terrible mistakes in pronunciation-the
boarding-school gardener-is now standing near the
door, mumbling vaguely and apparently unwilling to
leave. He has come back from the station: Mademoiselle Solange did not get off the train. "Mad-moisell So-lang..."He drags the syllables like downat-the-heel shoes. We too become impatient. However, an elderly woman who has just sent up her card
is shown in. She has received a rather confused letter
from her granddaughter begging to be taken away
at once. The woman lets herself be reassured easily:
at this time of year the children are all a little nervous.
Besides she need only call the little girl in to ask
her if she has anyone or anything to complain about.
Here she is. She kisses her grandmother. Soon we see
that her eyes can no longer leave those of the woman
interrogating her. She makes only a few gestures of
denial. Why not wait for the distribution of prizes
which is to take place in a few days? We sense that
she dare not speak. She will stay at school. The
42/ André Breton
child, abashed, heads for the door. On the threshold,
she seems to be torn by a great inner conflict. She
exits running. The grandmother, thanking the principal, says goodbye. Again the latter is alone. Again
begins the ridiculous, terrible waiting, in which we
do not know which object to move, which gesture
to repeat-what to do in order to make what we
are waiting for happen.... At last the sound of a
carriage.... The principal's face brightens. Confronting eternity. A charming woman enters without
knocking. It is she. She casually pushes away the arms
which embrace her. Dark, with brown hair, I don't
recall. Young. Magnificent eyes that mingle languor
with subtlety, cruelty, despair. Slender, dressed in
dark colors, black silk stockings. And something déclassé about her that is sympathetic. There is no explanation of her presence, though she apologizes for
being delayed. Her apparent coldness is in extreme
contrast with the welcome given her. She speaks,
with a rather affected indifference, of what her life
has been-insignificant since the year before, when
she was also here, at this same time of year. Without
giving any details about the school where she teaches.
But (here the conversation will assume a much more
intimate turn) there is now some question of the
friendship Solange has managed to form with some
of her more charming, more attractive, more gifted
students. She grows reflective. We strain to catch her
f de Mousiens futien nouon comme Rigeemr qmeten
2.psalair Wanden A- Bomet mavs comme antivte
ot vour que de cire me de travail que donr
leie ot hroje ntentef os morque les spota huisent anou lestes le marale saur l'nterene de la
mason hes Tozenr manteum emenglere gracele if foigne al in enatenth et ont nufomans mte our fone aecron
enbire antansour le devitior Chasse qui het ernd
la maison Ounaue il en toi'e we erapy iour far chen
Wontene an conms fe le eente vour nnz ete vorle mbeit
hl rit neusaire four faie un olisme sun les
ndvemenls witch Gn je
 e iertran fr
theaker le Lave er les grais ot non duru a sets laion
ss sermers smr len henriten flaignon bos fartin
qui sont olligr s'y besoune selym tenp our gagur levage at ne mantrond ar wtqn lecteur
far methe rontant dar dettonr on Or contisse, Rm3 etabimnent se lais on tinttioe tteatoe et bnt vor guelguer
lectener ereint ncere la generalite se natt cerpora qui lait tce quelle yent fourde sertrd'mme morole
tante hae en fart encore am fuhle raeur fuqi
hr theater out er wulz tom hne l e nlent
ilee in le tuequn Fsertre four eu jadomr fe
me gien achame tan devte
antrenent quudar lit no emmomr fas they, bo foubeler elle ent miait et mor anem rie Il Uion drantis
un de er camaraer llige da
Condunan ne co sdngnnesto m
Etir Aule wohe nes ouuzeon cher Whoud
co le
PLATE 11. Speaking of the Theåtre Moderne
(SEE PAGE 38)
PHOTO: HENRI MANUEL
PLATE 12. The child of a moment ago
enters without a word...
(SEE PAGE 45)
Nadja /45
words as they escape her lips. Suddenly she breaks
off, we have just time enough to see her open her
bag, raise her skirt revealing a beautiful leg and there,
a little above the black garter.... "But you didn't
give yourself a fix!" "No, oh now, what do you
expect." This answer made in a tone of such poignant
lassitude. As though revived, Solange asks for information in her turn: "And what about you
here? Tell me." Here too there have been such nice
new students. One in particular. So sweet. "Dear,
wait a moment." The two women lean out of the
window for a long moment. Silence. A BALLOON
FALLS IN THE ROOM. Silence. "There she is!
She's coming up." "Do you think so?" Both are leaning against the wall. Solange closes her eyes, relaxes,
sighs, stands motionless. Someone knocks. The child
of a moment ago enters without a word, slowly approaches the balloon, her eyes fixed on the principal's; she walks on tiptoe. Curtain. -The next act
opens at night, in an anteroom. Several hours have
passed. A doctor, with his black bag. A child has
disappeared. Everyone hopes nothing serious has happened to her. The house and garden have been
searched from top to bottom. The principal enters,
calmer than before. "An extremely sweet child, perhaps a little sad. Heavens, and her grandmother was
here only a few hours ago! I've just sent for her."
The doctor is suspicious: for two consecutive years
46/ André Breton
there has been an accident just when the children are
leaving. Last year a body was discovered in the well.
This year... Enter the prophetic, bleating gardener. He has gone to look down the well. "It's
queer, that's what it is, downright queer." The doctor vainly questions the gardener. "It's queer." He
has searched the whole garden with a lantern. Impossible for the girl to have left. The gates are locked.
The walls are high. And there is no sign of her in
the house. The gardener continues arguing with himself, hashing over the same evidence in a less and less
intelligible manner. The doctor is no longer listening.
"It's queer. The year before. I didn't see a thing.
I'll have to put a candle in tomorrow.... Where
can that little girl be? M'sieur le docteur. All
right, M'sieur le docteur. Still, it's queer.... And
didn't Ma-moisell-So-lange come yesterday, just like
that...."-"Did you say Mademoiselle Solange was
here? Are you sure? (It's more like last year than
I thought.) All right, that's all." The doctor hides
behind a column. It is not yet daylight. Solange
crosses the stage. She does not appear to share the
general emotion, she walks straight ahead, like an
automaton. -A short while later. All the searching
has proved vain. We are again in the principal's office.
The child's grandmother has just been taken ill in
the parlor. She must be given medical attention at
once. Certainly both these women seem to have
PHOTO: HENRI MANUEL
PLATE 13. Blanche Derval
(SEE PAGE 49)
Nadja /49
clear consciences. We consider the doctor. The inspector. The servants. Solange. The principal....
The latter, looking for a cordial, goes to the first-aid
cabinet, opens it. The child's bloody corpse appears,
head downward, and falls onto the floor. The scream,
the unforgettable scream. (In the performance, it
was considered advisable to inform the audience that
the actor playing the child was over seventeen. The
important thing is that she seemed about eleven.) I
don't know whether the scream I refer to brought
the play to an end, but I hope that its authors (the
play was the result of a collaboration between the
comic actor Palau and, I believe, a surgeon named
Thierry, but must have had the assistance of some
demon as well) did not expect Solange to endure
anything more; this character, too alluring to be true,
should never be obliged to submit to a show of punishment which, moreover, she denied with all her
splendor. I shall merely add that the role was played
by the most admirable and probably the only actress
of the period, whose work I saw at the Deux Masques
in several other plays where she was no less beautiful,
but of whom, perhaps to my great disgrace, I have
never heard anyone speak: Blanche Derval.
(As I was finishing the above account last evening,
I abandoned myself once more to the conjectures
that become unavoidable whenever I see this play
again-some three or four times, now-or whenever
50 André Breton
I run through it in my own mind. The lack of adequate indications as to what happens after the balloon falls and the ambiguity about precisely what
Solange and her partner are a prey to that transforms them into these magnificent predatory beasts
is still what puzzles me par excellence. As I woke
this morning, I had unusual difficulty shaking off a
rather squalid dream which I feel no need to transcribe here, since it derives chiefly from conversations
I had yesterday and bears no relation to this subject.
This dream seems interesting only insofar as it is
symptomatic of the repercussion such recollections,
provided one surrenders to them with a certain violence, may have on the course of one's thought. It
is remarkable, first of all, that the dream in question
emphasized only the painful, repugnant, not to say
cruel aspect of the considerations I had embarked
upon, that it scrupulously suppressed everything I
regard as their fabulous value, like an extract of
amber or an ageless attar of roses. On the other hand,
I must admit that if I wake, seeing quite clearly what
has just occurred: a moss-colored insect about twenty
inches long, taking the place of an old man, has
just headed toward some kind of machine, slipped
one penny into the slot instead of two, which seemed
to me to constitute a particularly reprehensible fraud,
to such a degree that, as though inadvertently, I
struck it with my cane and felt it fall on my head-
Nadja /51
I had time to notice its eyeballs gleam on my hatbrim before I choked and it was with only the greatest difficulty that two of its huge hairy legs were
removed from my throat while I experienced an
inexpressible disgust-it is clear that on the surface,
this dream primarily relates to the fact that on the
ceiling of the loggia where I have been sitting the
last few days there is a nest around which flutters
a bird which my presence rather alarms each time it
brings back from the fields, chirping as it flies, something like a big green grasshopper. But it is indisputable that the transposition, the intense fixation,
the otherwise inexplicable passage of such an image
from the level of a banal remark to the emotive level,
necessarily includes a reference to certain episodes
of Les Detraquées and the reversion to those conjectures I was speaking of. Since the production of
dream images always depends on at least this double
play of mirrors, there is, here, the indication of the
highly special, supremely revealing, "super-determinant"-in the Freudian sense of the word-role
which certain powerful impressions are made to play,
in no way contaminable by morality, actually experienced "beyond good and evil" in the dream, and,
subsequently, in what we quite arbitrarily oppose to
dream under the name of reality.)
The extremely deep and vivid emotion which the
52 André Breton
reading of Rimbaud gave me around 1915 and which,
of his entire work, only a very few poems such as
Dévotion continue to provide, is doubtless, at this
period, what enabled me, one day in the country,
when I was out walking alone in a downpour, to
meet a girl who turned to me without any warning,
as I was walking along beside her, and asked my
permission to recite one of her favorite poems: Rimbaud's Dormeur du Val. This was quite unexpected,
quite improbable. Again quite recently, when Marcel Noll and I went one Sunday to the Saint-Ouen
flea-market (I go there often, searching for objects
that can be found nowhere else: old-fashioned,
broken, useless, almost incomprehensible, even perverse-at least in the sense I give to the word and
which I prefer-like, for example, that kind of irregular, white, shellacked half-cylinder covered with
reliefs and depressions that are meaningless to me,
streaked with horizontal and vertical reds and greens,
preciously nestled in a case under a legend in Italian,
which I brought home and which after careful eхamination I have finally identified as some kind of
statistical device, operating three-dimensionally and
recording the population of a city in such and such
a year, though all this makes it no more comprehensible to me), our attention was simultaneously caught
by a brand new copy of Rimbaud's Oeuvres Complètes lost in a tiny, wretched bin of rags, yellowed
PLATE 14. When I went one Sunday
to the Saint-Ouen flea-market
(SEE PAGE 52)
100000
1300
IMAN
MOITS
LINEA
PLATE 15. Even perverse, like that kind of
irregular white half-cylinder...
(SEE PAGE 52)
Nadja /55
nineteenth-century photographs, worthless books,
and iron spoons. Fortunately I decide to leaf through
this volume, for I have time to discover there two
sheets of paper stuck between the pages: one a typewritten copy of a poem in free verse, the other a
penciled series of reflections on Nietzsche. But the
saleswoman leaves me no time to learn more. The
volume is not for sale, the documents it contains belong to her. She is still a young woman and extremely
jovial. She continues speaking with a great deal of
animation to someone who seems to be a workman
of her acquaintance and who listens to her, apparently, with delight. We too engage her in conversation. Extremely cultivated, she has no objection to
discussing her literary favorites which are: Shelley,
Nietzsche, and Rimbaud. Quite spontaneously she
even mentions the surrealists and Louis Aragon's
Paysan de Paris, which she has been unable to finish,
the variations on the word Pessimism having thrown
her off. All her remarks indicate a great revolutionary
faith. Upon my request, she gives me her poem
which I had found in the book and a few others as
well, all of which are interesting. Her name is Fanny
Beznos.
I also remember the apparently jocular proposition once made in my presence to a lady, asking that
she present to the "Centrale Surréaliste" one of the
56/ André Breton
remarkable sky-blue gloves she was carrying on a
visit to us at this "Centrale," my sudden fear when
I saw she was about to consent, and my supplications
that she do nothing of the kind. I don't know what
there can have been, at that moment, so terribly, so
marvelously decisive for me in the thought of that
glove leaving that hand forever. And even then this
matter did not assume its true proportions, I mean
those which it has retained, until after the moment
this lady proposed coming back to lay on the table,
on the very spot where I had so hoped she would
not leave the blue glove, a bronze one she happened
to possess and which I have subsequently seen at her
home-also a woman's glove, the wrist folded over,
the fingers flat-a glove I can never resist picking
up, always astonished at its weight and interested,
apparently, only in calculating its precise weight
against what the other glove would not have weighed
at all.
Only a few days ago, Louis Aragon pointed out
to me that the sign of a Pourville hotel showing in
red letters the words: MAISON ROUGE consisted
of certain letters arranged in such a way that when
seen from a certain angle in the street, the word
MAISON disappeared and ROUGE read POLICЕ.
This optical ilhision would have no importance if
on the same day, one or two hours later, the lady
PLATE 16. Also a woman's glove.
(SEE PAGE 56)
ON SIGNE
ICI
RIE 120
CARTES TA
PLATE 17. The Humanité bookstore
(SEE PAGE 63)
Nadja59
we shall call the lady of the glove had not taken me
to see a tableau changeant which I had never heard
of before and which was part of the furnishings in
the house she had just rented. This object was an
old engraving which, seen straight on, represents a
tiger, but which, regarded perpendicularly to its surface of tiny vertical bands when you stand several
feet to the left, represents a vase, and, from several
feet to the right, an angel. I offer, in closing, these
two facts because for me, under such conditions,
their connection cannot be avoided and because I
find it quite impossible to establish a rational correlation between them.
I hope, in any case, that the presentation of some
dozen observations of this order as well as what follows will be of a nature to send some men rushing
out into the street, after making them aware, if not
of the non-existence, at least of the crucial inadequacy of any so-called categorical self-evaluation,
of any action which requires a continuous application
and which can be premeditated. The slightest occurrence, if it is truly unforeseen, turns all such things
to idle talk. And after this, let no one speak to me
of work-I mean the moral value of work. I am
forced to accept the notion of work as a material
necessity, and in this regard I strongly favor its better, that is its fairer, division. I admit that life's
60/ André Breton
grim obligations make it a necessity, but never
that I should believe in its value, revere my own or
that of other men. I prefer, once again, walking by
night to believing myself a man who walks by daylight. There is no use being alive if one must work.
The event from which each of us is entitled to expect
the revelation of his own life's meaning-that event
which I may not yet have found, but on whose
path I seek myself-is not earned by work. But I am
anticipating, for perhaps it is this, more than anything
else, that once made me understand and that now
justifies, without further delay, Nadja's appearance
on the scene.
Last of all, now, the tower of the Manoir d'Ango
explodes and a snowfall of feathers from its doves
dissolves on contact with the earth of the great courtyard once paved with scraps of tiles and now covered
with real blood!
Last October fourth, toward the end of one
of those idle, gloomy afternoons I know so well how
to spend, I happened to be in the Rue Lafayette:
after stopping a few minutes at the stall outside the
Humanité bookstore and buying Trotsky's latest
work, I continued aimlessly in the direction of the
Opéra. The offices and workshops were beginning
to empty out from top to bottom of the buildings,
doors were closing, people on the sidewalk were
shaking hands, and already there were more people
63
64/ André Breton
in the street now. I unconsciously watched their
it faces, their clothes, their way of walking. No,
was not yet these who would be ready to create
the Revolution. I had just crossed an intersection
whose name I don't know, in front of a church.
Suddenly, perhaps still ten feet away, I saw a young,
poorly dressed woman walking toward me, she had
noticed me too, or perhaps had been watching me for
several moments. She carried her head high, unlike
everyone else on the sidewalk. And she looked so
delicate she scarcely seemed to touch the ground as
she walked. A faint smile may have been wandering
across her face. She was curiously made up, as though
beginning with her eyes, she had not had time to
finish, though the rims of her eyes were dark for
a blonde, the rims only, and not the lids (this effect
is achieved, and achieved exclusively, by applying the
mascara under the lid alone. It is interesting to note,
in this regard, that Blanche Derval, as Solange, even
when seen at close range, never seemed at all made
up. Does this mean that what is only slightly permissible in the street but advisable in the theater is important to me only insofar as it has defied what is
forbidden in one case, decreed in the other? Perhaps.) I had never seen such eyes. Without a moment's hesitation, I spoke to this unknown woman,
though I must admit that I expected the worst. She
smiled, but quite mysteriously and somehow know-
Nadja /65
ingly, though I had no reason to think so. She was
on her way, she claimed, to a hairdresser on the
Boulevard Magenta (I say claimed because she later
admitted she was going nowhere). She mentioned the
financial difficulties she was having, even insisted on
them, but apparently. as a way of explaining the
wretchedness of her appearance. We stopped at the
terrace of a café near the Gare du Nord. I took a
better look at her. What was so extraordinary about
what was happening in those eyes? What was it they
reflected-some obscure distress and at the same time
some luminous pride? And also the riddle set by the
beginning of a confession which, without asking me
anything further, with a confidence which could (or
which could not?) be misplaced, she made me. In
Lille, her native city which she had left only two
or three years ago, she had known a student she
may have loved and who loved her. One fine day
she decided to leave him when he least expected it,
and this "for fear of getting in his way." This is
when she came to Paris, writing him at increasingly
longer intervals without ever giving her address.
Nearly a year later, however, she ran into him in
Paris itself and both of them were extremely surprised. Even as he took her hands, he could not help
telling her how changed he found her, and then,
still holding these hands, he was surprised to see how
well manicured they were (though they are not at
66/ André Breton
all so now). Then she too had mechanically looked
at one of the hands holding hers and had not been
able to restrain an exclamation upon noticing that
the last two fingers were joined together. "But you've
hurt yourself!" The young man was obliged to show
her his other hand, which revealed the same deformity. She questions me about this for some time and
with great feeling: "Is such a thing possible? To
live so long with someone, to have every possible
chance to observe him, to enjoy discovering his
slightest physical and other peculiarities, and to end
by knowing him so badly that you haven't ever noticed that? You think: you think love can do such
things? And he was so angry, naturally, the only
thing I could do was stop talking, those hands.
Then he said something I don't understand, there
was a word in it I don't understand, he said: 'Ninny!
I'm going back to Alsace-Lorraine. At least the
women there know how to love.' Why: ninny? Do
you know?" Naturally I react quite strongly to the
sentence she has just quoted: "It doesn't matter. But
I think generalizations about Alsace-Lorraine are vile,
certainly the man was a fool, etc.... and then he
left, you haven't seen him since? I'm glad to hear
it." She told me her name, the one she had chosen
for herself: "Nadja, because in Russian it's the beginning of the word hope, and because it's only the
beginning." Just then she thinks of asking who I
Nadja /67
am (in the most limited sense of these words). I
tell her. Then she returns to her past, speaks of her
father, her mother. She is particularly moved by the
memory of the former: "He was so weak! If you
knew how weak he always was. When he was young,
you see, no one ever refused him anything. His parents had always been so indulgent. There weren't
automobiles then, but all the same a fine carriage,
the coachman.... But for him everything melted
away, and so quickly.... I love him so much. Each
time I think of him, I tell myself how weak he is.
. Oh, mother wasn't the same at all. She was a
good woman, that's all, what everyone means by a
good woman. Not the kind of wife my father needed
at all. At home, of course, everything was always
extremely clean, but you see, he wasn't the kind of
man who could come home and find her in an apron.
It's true he found a table set, or at least one there
was plenty of time to set, but he didn't find what
you call (with an ironic expression of greed and a
funny gesture) a table laid. I love mother, you know,
I wouldn't hurt her for anything in the world. So
when I came to Paris, she knew I had a letter of
reference to the Soeurs de Vaugirard. Of course I've
never used it. But whenever I write her, I end my
letter with these words: 'I hope I see you soon, and
I add: 'if God is willing, as Sister someone says,
and I put in any name that comes into my head.
68/ André Breton
And how happy that must make her! In the letters
I get from her, what touches me most, what I'd give
all the rest for, is the postscript. She always feels
she should add: 'I wonder what you can be doing
in Paris.' Poor mother, if she knew!" What Nadja
is doing in Paris-but she wonders herself. Yes, evenings, around seven, she likes to be in the Metro,
second-class. Most of the people in the car with her
have finished their day's work. She sits down among
them, and tries to detect from their expressions what
they are thinking about. Naturally they are thinking
about what they have left behind until tomorrow,
only until tomorrow, and also of what is waiting
for them this evening, which either relaxes or else
makes them still more anxious. Nadja stares at something in the air: "They are good people." More
moved than I care to show, this time I grow angry:
"Oh no. Besides, that's not the point. People cannot
be interesting insofar as they endure their work, with
or without all their other troubles. How can that
raise them up if the spirit of revolt is not uppermost
within them? Besides, at such moments you see them
and they don't see you. How I loathe the servitude
people try to hold up to me as being so valuable. I
pity the man who is condemned to it, who cannot
generally escape it, but it is not the burden of his
labor that disposes me in his favor, it is-it can only
be-the vigor of his protest against it. I know that
Nadja /69
at a factory furnace, or in front of one of those inexorable machines which all day long, at a few seconds'
interval, impose the repetition of the same gesture,
or anywhere else, under the least acceptable orders,
in a cell or before a firing squad, one can still feel
free: but it is not the martyrdom one undergoes
which creates this freedom. It is, I mean, a perpetual
unfettering: yet for this unfettering to be possible,
constantly possible, the fetters must not crush us,
as they do many of those you mention. But it is also,
and perhaps, in human terms, much more, the relatively long but marvelous series of steps which man
may make unfettered. Do you suppose these people
capable of taking such steps? Have they even the
time for them? Have they the heart? Good people,
you said, yes, good people like those who get themselves killed in wars, isn't that what you mean?
Enough talk of heroes: a lot of unhappy men and a
few poor imbeciles. For myself, I admit such steps
are everything. Where do they lead, that is the
real question. Ultimately they all indicate a road,
and on this road, who knows if we will not find the
means of unfettering or of helping those unable to
follow it to unfetter themselves? It is only then that
we may loiter a little, though without turning back."
(What I can say on this subject is sufficiently apparent, particularly if I should ever decide to deal
with it concretely.) Nadja listened to me and made
70/ André Breton
no attempt to contradict my statements. Perhaps she
had intended nothing less than an apology for labor.
She begins telling me about her health, which is extremely delicate. The doctor she has consulted and
whom she had picked out as a man she could trust,
has, at the cost of all the money she had left, ordered
her to leave for the Mont-Dore at once. This notion
delights her, since such a trip is so unfeasible for
her. But she has convinced herself that some arduous
form of manual labor might somehow substitute for
the cure she cannot take. Therefore she attempted
to get a job in a bakery, and even in a pork-butcher's,
where, as she decided in her purely poetic way, there
are more reasons to feel well than elsewhere. Everyone offered her ridiculously low salaries. It also turned
out that before she even received an answer she was
closely scrutinized. One master baker, who promised
her seventeen francs a day, after having glanced at
her a second time corrected himself: "seventeen or
eighteen." And she, playfully: "I told him: for seventeen, yes; for eighteen, no." Now we are walking
through the narrow Rue du Faubourg-Poissonière,
I think. It is dinnertime. I want to say goodbye. She
asks who is expecting me. "My wife." "Married!
Oh, well then..." and in a voice suddenly very
serious, very composed: "that's too bad. But...
and this great idea of yours? I was just beginning to
understand it so well. It was really a star, a star you
Nadja /71
were heading toward. You can't fail to reach it.
Hearing you speak, I felt that nothing would hold
you back, nothing, not even me.... You could
never see this star as I do. You don't understand:
It's like the heart of a heartless flower." I am deeply
moved. To distract her, I ask Nadja where she is
having dinner. And suddenly that frivolity which
is hers alone, perhaps, to put it precisely, that freedom, flashes out: "Where?" (pointing): "oh, over
there, or there (the two nearest restaurants), wherever I happen to be, you know. It's always this
way." About to leave her, I want to ask one question which sums up all the rest, a question which
only I would ever ask, probably, but which has at
least once found a reply worthy of it: "Who are
you?" And she, without a moment's hesitation: "I
am the soul in limbo." We separate, agreeing to meet
the next day at the bar at the corner of the Rue
Lafayette and the Rue du Faubourg Poissonière. She
makes me promise to bring her some of my books,
though I urge her not to read them. Life is other
than what one writes. She keeps me a few minutes
more to tell me what it is about me that touches
her. It is-in the way I think, speak, in my whole
manner, apparently: and this is one of the compliments which has moved me most in my whole lifemy simplicity.
72/ André Breton
October 5.-Nadja is here first, ahead of time. She
no longer looks the way she did yesterday. Rather
elegant today, in black and red, with an extremely
pretty hat which she takes off, revealing her strawcolored hair which has lost its incredible disorder,
silk stockings and shoes which, unlike yesterday's,
are quite presentable. The conversation has also become more difficult and starts on her part with a
number of hesitations. This lasts until she seizes the
books I have brought (Les Pas Perdus, Manifeste du
Surréalisme): "Lost steps? But there's no such thing!"
She leafs through the book with great curiosity. Her
eye is caught by one of Jarry's poems quoted in
the book:
Parmi les bruyères, penil des menhirs ...
Far from discouraging her, this poem, which she
first reads through quite quickly and then examines
in detail, seems to move her deeply. At the end of
the second quatrain, her eyes brim and are filled
with the vision of a forest. She sees the poet passing
near this wood, as though she could follow him at
a distance: "No, he's skirting the forest. He cannot
enter, he does not enter." Then she loses him and
returns to the poem at a point just before the place
where she left it, asking about the words that surprise her most, according each the precise sign of
intelligence, of assent it requires.
Nadja /73
Chasse de leur acier la martre et l'hermine.
"With their steel? The marten... and the
ermine. Yes, I see; the freezing burrows, the cold
rivers: De leur acier." A little further on:
En mangeant le bruit des hannetons, C'havann
(Frightened, closing the book): "Oh! That must
be death!"
The contrast in color between the covers of the
two volumes surprises and pleases her. Apparently
it "suits" me. I must have chosen them on purpose
(which I did). Then she tells me about two friends
she has had: one, when she first came to Paris, whom
she habitually refers to as "Dear friend," that was the
way she used to address him and he always insisted
she remain ignorant of who he was; she still indicates
great veneration for him, a man close to seventy-five,
who lived in the colonies a long time, and who told
her when he left that he was returning to Senegal.
The other is an American, who seems to have inspired her with feelings of quite another order: "Вesides, he called me Lena, in memory of his daughter
who had died. That was very affectionate, very
touching of him, wasn't it? But you know, I found
I couldn't stand being called that, as if it was a
dream: Lena, Lena.... So I would move my hand
in front of his eyes several times, quite close to his
74/ André Breton
eyes, like this, and I would say: 'No, not Lena,
Nadja.'" We leave the bar. She continues: "I see
your house. Your wife. She is dark, of course. Short.
Pretty. Now I see a dog beside her. Perhaps a cat
too, but somewhere else (this is correct). Now I
don't see anything else." I am about to go home,
Nadja joins me in the taxi. We remain silent for a
while, then she suddenly addresses me using tu: "А
game: say something. Close your eyes and say something. Anything, a number, a name. Like this (she
closes her eyes): Two, two what? Two women.
What do they look like? Wearing black. Where are
they? In a park.... And then, what are they
doing? Try it, it's so easy, why don't you want to
play? You know, that's how I talk to myself when
I'm alone, I tell myself all kinds of stories. And not
only silly stories: actually, I live this way altogether."* I leave her at my door: "And what about
me now? Where shall I go? But it's so easy to return
slowly toward the Rue Lafayette, the Rue du Faubourg Poissonière-to begin by going back to the
very spot where we were."
October 6.-So as not to have too far to walk,
I go out about four intending to stop in at the "Nouvelle France," where Nadja is supposed to meet me
* Does this not approach the extreme limit of the surrealist aspiration, its furthest determinant?
MARQUES ALA ROUVELLE FRANGE CHOPE 15
PLATE 18. At the "Nouvelle Francе"
(SEE PAGE 74)
CLEMI
R