GREYSON: Welcome to The Cabaretzara—

The rose cap falls onto my head in a heap. I take it in my hands and look up, confused. I look at the cap and then look back up above me. I put the rose cap on. Alex wanders out behind me, dressed as a blindfolded proboscis monkey. Once he gets near enough to the camera in his shot, he appears in my shot behind me. He then wiggles his proboscis around inside of my rose hat while I read my poem. 

GREYSON: (IDENTIFY PHRASES THAT ARE SHARED WITH ALEX’s POEM AND HAVE HIS VOICE ECHO WHEN I READ THOSE PHRASES)
The two of us sweated our way to this fragrant cluster together. 
But it’s I who have the roses first. 
Beneath this bouquet,
Phosphorescent breasts pour forth from freshly apolitical dreams. 
Being beneath this bouquet brings a broad sort of satisfaction,
A satisfaction that Alex & I have agreed to keep tucked in the pockets of an invisible coat we both will wear at once at all times going forward.
The scent it releases is a sheet of snow that covers over the streets. 
Dogs paw drums beneath its fragrant sheet. 
Shadows of flamingos wobble along across the walls of newly rose scented buildings.  
Between my fingers I roll roses into apple shapes and place each between branches in the nearby trees. 
So too does Alex rush to nibble each apple back to its original rose’s shape. 
Apples & roses, alike, will turn in the hands of those who listen closely,
Those who have been taught to sit on their hands every hour.
But never now.
Free your hands for moments like these,
Moments when the sweetnesses of the world can slip into view,
Then be exhaled away. 

Alex takes off the blindfold and hands it to me. I put on the blindfold and our bodies switch places. He is now wearing the rose cap and I am blindfolded with the monkey mask on. While he reads his poem I try to extend the party blower into the flowers as a 2nd proboscis. 

ALEX: (visibly sweating, with showmanship) Welcome to thecaberetzara—

ALEX: (addressing the camera welcomingly, a bit out of sorts) 

the first of the two
is sorta like an alibi 
in between hands, pockets, 
wherever the roses seem to be
our dreams will be
with you
in that way it is for us to hold this world
and we can be on our hands
as our hands are in our dreams
and your dreams in our moments
when these moments turn into you,
audience, will find as back pockets
slip away from walls
over my breasts too closely together
we will keep going forward 
along each roll & every place
across both times it's been hours
alike scents scent brings forth sweetness
not yet that which emits as
the breath of rose trees bent nearly-apple branch
freshly released
fraglessglasseses pour shattered showshoes over snowshoe coated streets
and sweated bouquets sit
tuckedbetweenalleys
foryoutofindthem
buildings view shapes
shape dreams wear covers
there will be the show! (Greyson’s voice the show)
invisible drums rush to the back of the band
ready to await the roll
apothphosphorescent flaming sheets drift
on a newly agreed breeze exhaled between flamingo and baleen (Greyson: flamingo and baleen)
we will be original
suspended bits broadfreeapplexcluster wobwobthenadowsmomented

for your satisfaction
we have
taught dogs to be political
